IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5402518

SFEARNet: A Network Combining Semantic Flow
and Edge-Aware Refinement for Highly Efficient
Remote Sensing Image Change Detection
Miao Li, Dongping Ming , Senior Member, IEEE, Lu Xu , Dehui Dong , and Yu Zhang
Abstract— In change detection, the pseudovariations in the
visual features of remote sensing (RS) images are attributed
to imaging conditions, lighting, seasonal changes, atmospheric
interference, and other factors. These pseudovariations yield
a great challenge to change detection. The traditional change
detection network usually suffers from upsampling information
loss and blurred edges. Aiming at resolving the above problems,
a semantic flow and edge-aware refinement network (SFEARNet)
for highly efficient RS image change detection has been proposed.
The pyramid feature enhancement module (PFEM) has been
designed for the enhancement of differential information. The
introduction of the semantic flow information transmission
module (SFITM) enables the effective transmission and retaining
of key information through semantic flow. An edge-aware
refinement module (EARM) has been developed, designed to
extract change edge and enhance the refinement effect of the
edge. The experiments have been conducted on the LEVIR
building change detection dataset (LEVIR-CD), WHU building
dataset (WHU-CD), Google dataset (GZ-CD), and cropland
change detection dataset (CLCD). In comparison with the
existing methodologies, the experimental results demonstrate
that SFEARNet attains the highest change detection accuracy
and the smallest floating-point operations per second (FLOPs)
while maintaining a similar number of parameters (Params).
This enables more efficient change detection. In particular, the
proposed method can effectively refine the edges of the change
region, reduce the loss of upsampling information, and enhance
differential feature extraction. This brings a new solution to the
field of RS image change detection. The code is available at
https://github.com/miao-0417/SFEARNet.
Index Terms— Change detection, edge-aware, feature enhancement, remote sensing (RS), semantic flow.
Received 15 July 2024; revised 14 October 2024 and 25 January 2025;
accepted 23 February 2025. Date of publication 26 February 2025; date of
current version 24 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2022YFB3903604 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 42371379. (Corresponding author: Dongping Ming.)
Miao Li, Dehui Dong, and Yu Zhang are with the School of Information
Engineering, China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083,
China (e-mail: 2004220023@email.cugb.edu.cn; dongdhcugb@163.com;
3004230011@email.cugb.edu.cn).
Dongping Ming is with the School of Information Engineering, China
University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China, also with
the Hebei Key Laboratory of Geospatial Digital Twin and Collaborative
Optimization, China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083,
China, and also with the Frontiers Science Center for Deep-time Digital
Earth, China University of Geosciences, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail:
mingdp@cugb.edu.cn).
Lu Xu is with the School of Information Engineering, China University
of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China, and also with the Hebei
Key Laboratory of Geospatial Digital Twin and Collaborative Optimization,
China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China (e-mail:
xlirs@email.cugb.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3545906

I. I NTRODUCTION
HANGE detection is an active research field in remote
sensing (RS). By comparing the same area two or more
times, differences in ground objects can be monitored. The
differences can be compared with the help of image-processing
techniques and mathematical models. Change detection is
used in many fields. These include land cover and land use
(LCLU) change [1], [2], [3], [4] and disaster assessment [5],
[6], [7], [8]. An important branch of change detection is
bitemporal change detection. In comparison with the widely
known RS image interpretation approaches such as image
classification [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], target
detection [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25],
[26], [27], [28], [29], and super-resolution reconstruction [30],
[31], [32], [33], change detection is based on the analysis
of bitemporal images. There is a further need to improve
bitemporal change detection techniques due to the increase in
data and the increasing complexity of land cover. Two aspects
in the following should not be ignored.
1) Information Maintaining During Upsampling: The network’s performance has been greatly influenced by the
high-resolution feature. Low-resolution features contain
rich semantic information. During the upsampling
process, this information may become blurred or lost.
Reducing information loss during upsampling becomes
particularly important [34], [35], [36]. This article
introduces semantic flow for information transfer. This
method can reduce information loss and obtain a
strongly semantically representative feature map.
2) Edge Information Utilization: Edge information has a
large impact on the accuracy. There are two main
problems in current change detection based on edge
information. The first one does not use real edge
information for constraints [37], [38]. The second one
uses real edge information, but the edge information
shares a decoder with the change region information
[39], [40], [41]. It is easy to cause incomplete extraction
of the change area and create voids. A new decoder
is proposed in this article. It uses the first and fourth
layer features as a decoder for edge information. The
preservation of the second and third layer features
maintains integrity for change detection.
With these factors in mind, this article presents a network
called semantic flow and edge-aware refinement network
(SFEARNet). SFEARNet comprises semantic flow and edgeaware refinement. The network architecture used is the

C

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Siamese neural network. The SegFormer [42] structure is used
for both the encoding and decoding parts of the network. Also,
it builds on this foundation and includes improvements. First,
a pyramid feature enhancement module (PFEM) is presented.
This module can enhance the differential features. It integrates
the original differential features, contextual features, and
attention features. Moreover, a new module, known as the
semantic flow information transmission module (SFITM), has
been integrated into the decoder component of SegFormer
to minimize the semantic information loss in the decoding
stage. Therefore, to improve the edge awareness of the change
detection network, an edge-aware refinement module (EARM)
is introduced to focus more on the edges of the change region.
This article makes the following contributions to knowledge.
1) A Network Called SFEARNet Is Proposed in This
Article: The network integrates semantic flow and edgeaware refinement. Three modules are presented in this
article, namely PFEM, SFITM, and EARM. With the
same level of parameter count, SFEARNet not only
ensures detection accuracy but also achieves the highest
efficiency. Therefore, SFEARNet represents an appropriate solution in the domain of RS image change detection.
2) This Article Makes Extensive Use of Multiscale
Features: In SFITM, it uses the transfer of semantic
information between deep and shallow features to
get high-resolution feature maps with high semantic
information. In PFEM, contextual information can be
captured at multiple scales using different dilation rates.
PFEM can integrate original and enhanced features. The
network is improved by the strategy of using multiscale
features. There is also an increase in the accuracy and
reliability of change detection.
3) To Accurately Measure Change Boundaries, a New
Decoder Component Is Introduced in EARM: This
design not only effectively separates edge information
from change region information but also enhances the
network’s sensitivity and accuracy in identifying change
boundaries. The module enables the capture of subtle
changes in RS images with greater precision. This provides a solid foundation for the application in the field.
The remaining sections are organized as follows. Section II
provides a brief overview of related work. Section III presents
the details of SFEARNet. Section IV provides a comparison
with the current state of the art. Section V discusses the
methodology. Section VI summarizes this entire article.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
Deep learning excels at identifying sophisticated images.
The technology has a high recognition rate. It also
improves timeliness and automation. The convolutional neural
network (CNN) is a pivotal deep learning algorithm. CNNs
have wide applications in RS and are used in change
detection. Advanced techniques such as feature enhancement,
minimizing information loss, and the use of edge information
are more often used. The area of RS image change detection
has been expanded.
A. Deep Learning in RS
RS data typically include satellite images, radar data, and
more. These data are large and complex. Traditional methods

often struggle to fully exploit the potential information within
it. With the introduction of deep learning, the processing and
interpretation of this data have been greatly enhanced.
First, deep learning is used in the classification [43], [44],
[45], [46] and segmentation [47], [48], [49], [50] of RS
images. In classification, Ji et al. [43] proposed PASSNet.
In segmentation, Chen et al. [47] proposed a coarse-to-fine
task. Xu et al. [49] proposed RSSFormer. Second, deep
learning is also widely used for target detection [26], [51],
[52] and anomaly detection [23], [53], [54], [55]. A weakly
supervised network was used by Han et al. [26]. Wang et al.
[52] proposed FSoD-Net. Liu et al. [23] used an unsupervised
anomaly network. Furthermore, deep learning is a crucial
component in super-resolution reconstruction [56], [57], [58].
Xiao et al. [56] proposed EdiffSR. Last but not least, deep
learning has demonstrated considerable potential in the domain
of change detection [59], [60], [61]. Tang et al. [59] proposed
WNet. Yuan et al. [61] proposed MFGFNet.
As deep learning algorithms improve, more and more
uses will be found for it in RS. Especially in RS image
change detection, deep learning will play its fast and efficient
advantage to improve the efficiency.
B. Minimize Information Loss in Change Detection
One of the important issues in increasing accuracy is how
to reduce information loss during the transmission process.
Many scholars have put forward a variety of solutions to
reduce the loss incurred during the transfer of information
[34], [35], [36], [62], [63], [64]. Peng et al. [34] used a dense
attention technique. This is achieved by multiple upsampling
attention units. Fang et al. [35] used densely linked to reduce
the question. Wang et al. [62] used distinct branches to
combine feature maps of varied degrees. Gu et al. [63]
combined the various levels of difference features through skip
connection. Long et al. [36] proposed a high-level information
refinement module. Wang et al. [64] introduced a structure
with multiresolution parallel to fully utilize visual information
at various resolutions.
Although considerable progress has been made in recent
years in reducing information loss, current research is still
largely focused on optimizing network structures to mitigate
information loss during network transmission. However,
another significant source of information loss has been
overlooked. The source is the loss of details during the
upsampling process. It is essential to implement more effective
solutions. In this article, the method of semantic flow is
employed to refine the transmission of information across
images of different resolutions, resulting in highly abstracted
high-resolution feature maps.
C. Feature Enhancement in Change Detection
Feature enhancement represents a pivotal aspect. This assists
computers in enhancing the understanding of spatial and
hierarchical characteristics. Also, feature strengthening can be
defined as a way to enhance the performance of a model [65],
[66], [67], [68], [69], [70], [71], [72], [73], [74], [75], [76].
Daudt et al. [65] proposed three topologies for a full CNN
to extract deep information. Zhu et al. [66] added a feature

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

comparison module (FCM). It is aimed at limiting channel
numbers in feature fusion. A hybrid convolutional module
was used by Wang et al. [67]. Li et al. [68] used multiscale
convolution kernels. Features of ground object elements can be
detailed using the different kernels. Chen et al. [69] enabled
the efficient and effective modeling of situations within the
spatial–temporal domain. Li et al. [70] learned the global
context with transformer. Zhang and Shi [71] used a network
with deep feature difference convolutional. Du et al. [72]
proposed ESDSCNet with enhanced shallow feature difference
and semantic context. Song et al. [73] incorporated local and
global data from CNN and branch fusion in two directions.
Wang et al. [75] proposed MTCNet. Bandara and Patel [76]
proposed ChangeFormer. Liu et al. [74] proposed MSCANet.
Both of them modeled long-range context information.
Considering feature enhancement is crucial when studying
and analyzing areas of change. It can significantly improve the
accuracy of identifying and understanding regional changes.
Feature enhancement can highlight or amplify specific
image or data features, making the change regions more
pronounced. It becomes easier to detect and analyze. This
article integrates the original differential features, differential
contextual features, and differential attention features. This can
improve the model’s performance. Integrating these features
helps understand complex regions better.
D. Edge Information in Change Detection
Edge information can be utilized as an auxiliary feature.
Edge information is employed to identify changes in the
boundaries and contours of objects. The edge can aid in
the identification of the location and extent of changes in
objects [37], [40], [41], [77], [78], [79]. Xiang et al. [40]
used multimodal transformers that include edge guidance.
Zhang et al. [77] introduced a module for preserving object
integrity and compactness. Wang et al. [41] proposed a
super-pixel module to create edges. Xia et al. [78] proposed
an edge detection branch (EDB). Bai et al. [37] combined
discriminative information and edge structure. Zhu et al. [79]
introduced edge-aware and edge-guidance feature modules.
It is necessary to find change regions, and for this, accurate
edge information is a basic requirement. The correct edge
information can always describe and define the margins
of the desired regions with great detail. Hence, effectively
and efficiently obtaining the edge information has become
vital for the change detection operation. In this article, the
difference between the predicted and real edge information
has been calculated through dice loss. It has helped enhance
the extraction of edge information in change regions.
In summary, the enhancement of neural network technology
in the recent past has seen the improvement of RS image
change detection. Feature enhancement, reducing information
loss, and incorporating edge information have been widely
used and are still on the rise. These enhancements have not
only refined the detection of changes but also increased the
reliability and flexibility of the system. With the progress of
technology, RS image change detection will go further to a
more intelligent and precise level.

5402518

III. M ETHODOLOGY
This section is dedicated to the introduction of the
methods utilized in the article. An initial summary of the
combining semantic flow and edge-aware refinement network
(SFRARNet) is provided. This is followed by a more detailed
description of PFEM, SFITM, and EARM. Finally, the lose
function is displayed.
A. Overall Structure of SFEARNet
SFEARNet is based on the SegFormer architecture. The
achievement of this objective is made by means of PFEM,
SFITM, and EARM. The overall network framework is a
Siamese network. SFEARNet is illustrated in Fig. 1. The
network uses SegFormer’s encoder, the MixTransformer. The
MixTransformer is the core feature extraction module.
Initially, two RS images of an area, captured at disparate
points in time, are fed into the shared-weight encoder. This
process yields feature vectors, designated as Fi and f i , where
i is the level of the feature vector. Subsequently, feature
vector pairs (Fi , f i ), derived from different RS images and
at the same level, are transmitted to PFEM. Following PFEM
processing, an enhanced feature representation, designated
FPFEMi , is generated.
Subsequently, EARM is applied, comprising two stages.
In stage one, the most representative feature scales FPFEM1
and FPFEM4 are selected. They are inputs for subsequent
processing within EARM. This module employs a distinctive
edge-awareness mechanism to refine edge information. This
facilitates the network’s ability to discern a more accurate
edge. The output edges generated by EARM are evaluated
with the ground-truth edges through the calculation of loss
functions. This process serves to enhance the capability of
edge recognition while also improving the accuracy of edge
information extraction. In stage two, the edge information
generated by EARM acts on FPFEMi . Here, the resolution
of edge information is adjusted through max pooling to
refine FPFEMi and obtain a more refined feature representation,
FEARMi .
Finally, the refined features FEARMi are transmitted to the
SegFormer decoder. To improve the precision of generated
images, the conventional bilinear interpolation upsampling
technique employed within the SegFormer framework has
been superseded by SFITM. SFITM module enhances the
generation of large-scale RS images, thus optimizing the
network’s overall performance.
B. Semantic Flow Information Transmission Module
It is very important to get feature maps with high resolution
and strong semantic representation for improving performance.
The upsampling module plays an important role in change
detection. Traditional upsampling methods, such as bilinear
interpolation, can generate relatively smooth results in the
process of processing. It is inevitable that such methods will
result in some details getting lost. Inspired by the literature
[80], this article proposes an SFITM, as shown in Fig. 2.
This module preserves the details of the original images
well. It maximizes the retention and transmission of key

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

Framework of SFEARNet.

details within the images. A multiscale feature integration
strategy is also employed. This strategy makes full use of
information from feature maps with different resolutions. The
core of this module lies in the information transmission
based on semantic flow. The semantic representativeness
of deep features is preserved. This makes it possible
to obtain high-resolution features with strong semantic
representation. Semantic information is transmitted between
different resolutions. The integration of multiscale features has
been achieved.
First, given two levels of input feature maps FlHl ×Wl ×Cl (deep
H ×W ×C
feature) and F p p p p (shallow feature), the resolution of
H ×W ×C

H ×W ×C

Fl p p p is equal to that of F p p p p by bilinear
upsampling, as shown in (1). Two feature maps are
concatenated. Then, they are convolved with a kernel size of
3 × 3 with two filters. A semantic flow field 1p is
predicted, as shown in (2). The size of the semantic flow field
is H p × W p × 2. Each element in the flow field corresponds
to an offset, which represents the positional offset of each
position in the previous level in the current level, and the
formulas are given as follows:


H ×W ×C
Fl p p p = Bilinear Upsample FlHl ×Wl ×Cl
(1)



H ×W ×C
H ×W ×C
1p = Conv3×3 Concat Fl p p p , F p p p p
(2)

Framework of SFITM.

where H denotes the length, W denotes the width, C
denotes the number of channels, and Conv3×3 represents
3 × 3 convolutions.
Next, after obtaining the semantic flow field, each position
f p of the previous level is mapped to a position fl of
the current level, as shown in (3). After mapping, linear
interpolation of the current level feature map is used to obtain
the final feature map F. This process uses a differentiable
bilinear sampling mechanism, as shown in (4). By adding it
with the results of Fl bilinear upsampling above, the output
FSFITM of the module is obtained, as shown in (5). The
formulas are given as follows:
1p( f p )
fl = f p +
2
X
F=
ω′f Fl ( fl′ )

(3)
(4)

f ′ ∈N( f l)



FSFITM = F + Bilinear Upsample FlHl ×Wl ×Cl

(5)

where ω′f denotes the bilinear interpolation weights and N( f l)
represents neighbors of the warped points fl in Fl
In this article, SFITM is utilized to replace the traditional
bilinear interpolation upsampling method. The warp operation
can perform geometric transformations on images. It can
spatially align an image with another image taken at a
different point in time. Bilinear interpolation is an image
resampling technique. It is used to adjust the image resolution.
By combining the warp operation with bilinear interpolation,
the advantages of both processing methods can be integrated.
SFITM preserves the spatial alignment information of the
image. It also maintains a high resolution. This aids in
subsequent change detection tasks. SFITM allows for a more
accurate restoration of image detail. This helps to improve the
model’s perception. Ultimately, it improves the accuracy and
precision of change detection.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

C. Pyramid Feature Enhancement Module
Accurately measuring the differences between bitemporal
features is crucial. Traditional methods often rely on simple
difference calculations. This leads to the extraction of
ambiguous differences in features. The contextual information
associated with the difference features is not sufficiently
preserved. The PFEM, as shown in Fig. 3, is proposed
to overcome this limitation. The module uses a multiscale
fusion strategy. First, it preserves the original differential
features. Next, dilated convolution is introduced in the feature
enhancement stage, allowing contextual data to be processed
at various scales using different dilation rates. Finally,
an attention mechanism is used to enhance features from
two branches. The module integrates the original differential
features, contextual features, and attention features.
The receptive fields of dilated convolutions with different
dilation rates exhibit a pyramid-like structure. Therefore,
this module is aptly named the PFEM, reflecting its unique
advantages in multiscale feature extraction. Through precise
operations, this module not only preserves the integrity of the
original features but also accurately extracts and significantly
enhances the differential features. This ensures the effective
utilization and accurate analysis of differential features in the
change detection process. The process is given as follows.
On the one hand, on the bitemporal features Fc and Fc ,
where c is the channel number, a difference calculation is
performed. This method captures the differences between
the feature values of bitemporal images. This study draws
inspiration from the ASPP module in DeeplabV3+ [81].
A multiscale dilated convolution method is hereby introduced
with a view to capturing contextual information from changing
regions at different scales. This article uses the 1 × 1
convolution for original feature extraction, resulting in F1×1
as shown in (6). In addition, four parallel dilated 3 × 3
convolutions with different dilation rates (d = 1, 2, 3, 4)
are used. Contextual features can be extracted from the
d,c
different dilation rates. This method results in F3×3
, as shown
in (7). This approach maintains the spatial integrity of the
convolutional features while capturing regions of varying sizes
using different receptive fields. Subsequently, the multiscale
contextual features are concatenated, and 1 × 1 convolution
is employed to downsample the channel, resulting in Fcat ,
as shown in (8). Then, add Fcat to the original difference
features, resulting in Fadd , as shown in (9). This process
retains the original features with richer context information,
enhancing the features effectively. The formulas are given as
follows:
F1×1 = Conv1×1 (abs(FC − f C ))

(6)

d,c
F3×3
= Convd,c
3×3 (abs(FC − f C )),

d ∈ 1, 2, 4, 8
(7)


d,c
Fcat = Conv1×1 Concat F1×1 , F3×3 , d ∈ 1, 2, 4, 8 (8)


Fadd = Fcat + abs(FC − f C )

(9)

where d is the dilation rate, c is the number of channels,
Conv1×1 represents 1 × 1 convolution, and abs represent
the absolute. Convd,c
3×3 represents 3 × 3 convolutions with

5402518

the dilation rates and channel numbers. Concat represents
concatenation.
On the other hand, the features from these two phases
are concatenated. The information in the bitemporal features
(Fc , f c ) can be fully exploited. The feature information of the
original bitemporal image is also retained. This concatenation
2×c
2×c
results in Fcat
, as shown in (10). Fcat
is sent to the channel
and spatial attention. The attention is named convolutional
block attention module (CBAM) [82]. CBAM enables the
model to perceive key information with greater efficacy. It is
worth noting that CBAM can significantly improve network
performance without increasing network complexity. After the
feature is processed by CBAM, 1 × 1 convolution is used
for channel downsampling to optimize the feature expression
resulting in Fconv , as shown in (11). Subsequently, this article
adds the downsampled features to Fadd . Fadd represents the
different features processed and enhanced by multiscale dilated
convolution. This addition results in FPFEM , as shown in (12).
The objective is to integrate the different features from the
original image features. It can use the original image’s feature
information. This process can improve SFEARNet’s change
accuracy. The formulas are given as follows:
2×c
Fcat
= Concat(Fc , f c )

Fconv = Conv1×1 CBAM
FPFEM = Fconv + Fadd

(10)
2×c
Fcat



(11)
(12)

where CBAM stands for the convolutional block attention
module. c is the number of channels.
Differential features are enhanced using PFEM. PFEM
uses a multiscale pyramid structure. The use of dilation
convolutions with different dilation rates is a necessary
step. The different information of change regions can be
captured and enhanced. At the same time, the original
features of the bitemporal images are concatenated. Then, the
CBAM attention mechanism is applied. The enhanced change
detection features are obtained by adding the features obtained
from these two methods. The module combines the original
differential, contextual, and attention features. PFEM enhances
the model’s detection accuracy.
D. Edge-Aware Refinement Module
Edges are fundamental visual elements in images, containing object shapes and contours. The incorporation of edge
features is a pivotal aspect of deep learning visual models,
exerting a considerable influence on image comprehension
and model efficacy. In designing and training deep learning
models, efficiently and accurately extracting and utilizing edge
information are crucial. Inspired by the existing literature [83],
this article proposes an EARM, as shown in Fig. 4. This
module aims to extract and optimize edges of the changing
region, using this edge information to refine network features.
In this module, a decoder is proposed. It is used to identify
and precisely extract edge information of the changing regions
in the image. The decoder primarily utilizes shallow and deep
features from the network structure. This allows decoders to
take advantage of both shallow features in terms of detail and
deep features in terms of semantics. It can locate the edges of

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Framework of PFEM.

changing regions. This decoder overcomes the limitations of
single feature layers in edge detection by combining features
from different layers. It achieves higher accuracy in complex
change detection.
Edge information is extracted using the Sobel edge detection
operator. The calculation process is shown in (13)–(17). This
is followed by threshold segmentation to extract the edges of
changed objects, with the threshold value set to 20, as shown
in (18). This module is divided into two stages. Stage 1
involves the extraction and optimization of edge information.
Stage 2 uses this edge information to refine the features


−1 0 1
Sx (i, j) = −2 0 2
(13)
−1 0 1
Gx =

1 X
1
X

I (x + i, y + j) · Sx (i, j)

(14)

i=−1 j=−1


−1
Sy (i, j) =  0
1
Gy =

−2
0
2

1 X
1
X


−1
0
1

I (x + i, y + j) · Sy (i, j)

(15)

(16)

i=−1 j=−1

G=

q

G 2x + G 2y

(17)

where Sx (i, j) denotes the horizontal direction gradient
operator. Sy (i, j) is the operator for the vertical gradient.
I (x, y) is the pixel value of the image at the location (x, y).
G x is the horizontal gradient. G y is the vertical gradient. G is
the magnitude of the gradient
(
255, if input(x, y) > 20
output(x, y) =
(18)
0,
if input(x, y) ≤ 20
where input(x, y) is the pixel value.

Hs ×Ws ×Cs
In Stage 1, the shallow and deep features FPFEM
Hd ×Wd ×Cd
and FPFEM
are enhanced by PFEM. Perform a 3 × 3
convolution on deep features and shallow features to obtain
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Hd ×Wd ×Cd
Fconv
and Fconv
, as shown in (19) and (20). Shallow
features are effective at capturing detail information in images,
such as edges. Deep features can capture high-level semantic
information, such as categories. The shallow features here use
the first-layer features. The deep features here use the fourthlayer features. This enables the concurrent utilization of the
edge information contained within first-layer features and the
category information embedded within fourth-layer features.
Use SFITM to adjust the resolution of deep features to
match that of shallow features. Concatenate the deep features
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
after SFITM with the shallow features to obtain Fcat
,
as shown in (21), to create a rich feature representation.
Double convolution is performed on the concatenated features
to further extract and emphasize the edge features of the
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
changing region, resulting in Fedge
, as shown in (22).
This series of fine operations aims to accurately identify the
changing regions in the image and assign higher weights to
their edge information. The corresponding formulas are given
as follows:


Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Fconv
= Conv3×3 FPFEM
(19)


Hd ×Wd ×Cd
Hd ×Wd ×Cd
Fconv
= Conv3×3 FPFEM
(20)

Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Hd ×Wd ×Cd
Fcat
= Concat Fconv
, SFITM Fconv
(21)

Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Hs ×Ws ×Cs
Fedge
= Conv3×3 Conv3×3 Fcat
(22)

where H stands for the length, W stands for the width, C
stands for the number of channels, and SFITM represents the
semantic flow information transmission module.
In Stage 2, the edge information is used to refine the
output features of PFEM. On the abovementioned edge
information, a maximum-pooling operation is performed.
H ×W ×C
It results in Fedge-feature
, as shown in (23). Maximum pooling
can extract edge features that are most significant. The
feature values output from PFEM are multiplied by this
pooled edge information on an element-by-element basis.
The representation of the edge is directly improved by this
procedure. The result of the multiplication is added to the
values of the original characteristics. It is able to preserve
the nonedge information in the original features. The method
H ×W ×C
gets Fedge-correction
, as shown in (24). This step ensures that
the edge information is effectively enhanced, while other
important information in the original features is also preserved.
Finally, the edge-enhanced features are passed into the CBAM
attention mechanism. CBAM can further focus on the key
channels and spatial positions in the feature map, thereby
obtaining the features after edge refinement resulting in FESGM ,
as shown in (25). These feature values not only contain
rich edge information but also enhance key regions in the
image through the attention mechanism. This results in a more
accurate and more robust representation of the features. The
specific calculation formulas are given as follows:


Hl ×Wl ×Cl
H ×W ×C
Fedge-feature
= MaxPool Fedge
(23)

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

5402518

given as follows:
N −1

L ce = −

1 X
yn log (xn )
N n=0

(26)

|A ∩ B|
(27)
|A ∪ B|
2 × |A ∩ B|
L Dice = 1 −
(28)
|A| + |B|
L total = L(GTlabel , prelabel ) + L(GTlabel , prelabel )
+ L(GTedgelabel , preedge )
(29)

L Jaccard = 1 −

where L ce denotes the CE loss. L Jaccard denotes the Jaccard
loss. L Dice denotes the dice loss. x is the input value. y is
the label value. N is the number of categories. |A| and |B|
indicate the numbers of elements A and B. GT represents the
ground truth, and Pre represents predictions.
IV. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
The SFEARNet is compared with the most advanced
network models in detail on four datasets. This series of
experiments has been designed to verify the advantages and
effectiveness of SFEARNet.

Fig. 4.

Framework of EARM.
H ×W ×C
H ×W ×C
H ×W ×C
H ×W ×C
Fedge-refine
= Fedge-feature
× FPFEM
+ FPFEM


H ×W ×C
FESGM = CBAM Fedge-refine

(24)
(25)

where H denotes the length, W denotes the width, and C
denotes the number of channels. MaxPool represents the max
pooling.
This article proposes an EARM that utilizes both shallow
and deep features to accurately extract edge information.
More importantly, this edge information is applied to the
feature values at different stages to enhance their refinement.
This strategy is particularly crucial in change detection
tasks, producing more accurate and detailed change detection
outcomes.

E. Loss Function
EARM is crucial to the network structure. The accuracy of
the edges is directly influenced by this factor. This, in turn,
has a profound impact on the subsequent extraction of deep
change features. Dice loss is used to ensure that the training
phase produces precise boundary prediction information by the
use of original edge data.
The cross-entropy (CE) and Jaccard losses are calculated
for the label predictions and the ground-truth values. This
evaluation assesses the model’s performance in predicting
categories.
In conclusion, the total loss is a combination of CE, Jaccard,
and dice losses. This is designed to improve the accuracy of
detecting edges and predicting categories. The formulas are

A. Datasets
LEVIR building change detection dataset (LEVIR-CD)
[84], WHU building dataset (WHU-CD) [85], Google dataset
(GZ-CD) [86], and cropland change detection dataset (CLCD)
[74] datasets are used for the experiments.
1) LEVIR-CD [84]: The dataset was acquired from Google
Earth. It has a resolution of 0.5 m. The image size is
1024 × 1024. Notable changes have been observed in
the land use patterns, particularly within the construction
industry. The types of changes cover various types of
buildings. In this experiment, the size is reduced to
256 × 256, with a nonoverlapping cut. The dataset is
divided into a training set/validation set/test set, with a
size of 7120/1024/2048.
2) WHU-CD [85]: A pair of bitemporal aerial photographs
comprise the dataset. The resolution is 0.2 m. The size
is 32 507 × 15 354. These images cover areas where
earthquakes have occurred and have been reconstructed
for many years, with the majority of the data about
the reconstruction of buildings. The dataset is cut to
256 × 256 with nonoverlapping. The training set, the
validation set, and the test set are divided according to
a ratio of 8:1:1, with a size of 6096/762/762.
3) GZ-CD [86]: The data collection period is 2006–2019.
The spatial resolution is 0.55 m. The size range is from
1006 × 1168 to 4936 × 5224 pixels. The image has
been cut into nonoverlapping 256 × 256 pixel squares.
The training set, the validation set, and the test set were
divided according to a ratio of 8:1:1, with a size of
2882/361/360.
4) CLCD [74]: These data were collected in 2017 and
2019. The data are from Gaofen-2. Spatial resolution
ranges from 0.5 to 2 m. A 512 × 512 bitemporal image
and a binary label are used for each sample set. In total,
there are 600 pairs of variation images. The CLCD’s

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

labeled types mainly include cropland change. In the
application, it is cropped to 256 × 256 size. The total
size of the training set, the validation set, and the test
set is calculated to be 1440/480/480.
B. Evaluation Indicators
To verify the proposed network performance, this article
uses six indicators to evaluate the similarity between the
predicted results and the real values. These are precision (Pre),
recall (Rec), F1 score (F1), intersection over union (IOU),
overall accuracy (OA), and kappa coefficient (Kappa). The
indicators are defined as follows:
TP + TN
(30)
OA =
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
Pre =
(31)
TP + FP
TP
Rec =
(32)
TP + FN
2 × Pre × Rec
F1 =
(33)
Pre + Rec
TP
IOU =
(34)
TP + FP + FN
(TP + FP) × (TP + FN)
pe =
(TP + TN + FP + FN)2
(FN + TN) × (FP + TN)
+
(35)
(TP + TN + FP + FN)2
OA − pe
Kappa =
(36)
1 − pe
where TP, FP, TN, and FN are the number of true positive,
false positive, true negative, and false negative samples.
C. Comparative Experiment
SFEARNet is compared with several state-of-the-art bitemporal change detection networks. These include pure CNN networks, attention-based networks, CNN-transformer networks,
pure transformer networks, and edge-based networks. Pure
CNN models include fully convolutional early fusion (FC-EF)
[65], FC-Siam-conc [65], and FC-Siam-diff [65]. Attentionbased networks include STANet [84], difference enhancement
and spatial–spectral nonlocal (DESSN) [87], and efficient
ultralightweight spatial–spectral feature cooperation (USSFC)
[88]. CNN-transformer networks include bitemporal image
transformer (BIT) [69], MSCANet [74], and AMTNet [89].
Pure transformer network includes ChangeFormer [76]. Edgebased network includes EATDer [39]. Through a comparison
with these methods, the advantages and the effectiveness of
SFEARNet can be evaluated in a more precise way.
1) FC-EF [65]: The network used an early fusion category.
The images from different phases are superimposed on
the channel. The superimposed image is sent to the
network for training and learning differences.
2) FC-Siam-Conc [65]: This is an intuitive way. The
network uses a Siamese structure. During the decoding
steps, the features are concatenated in two skip
connections.
3) FC-Siam-Diff [65]: To be different with FC-Siam-conc,
the absolute value of two different images has been
concatenated.

4) STANet [84]: The study is based on a spatial–temporal
attention module. The spatial–temporal attention module
consists of the basic spatial–temporal attention module
and the pyramid spatial–temporal attention module.
5) BIT [69]: The network proposed a bitemporal image
transformer. It expressed images in a few tokens.
Finally, it used a transformer encoder.
6) ChangeFormer [76]: The transformer-based network
and the unified transformer encoder with multilayer
perception decoder.
7) MSCANet [74]: It is a CNN-transformer network. The
network utilized a CNN-based feature extractor and
a transformer-based multiscale context aggregation.
In addition, it employed a multibranch prediction
head.
8) DESSN [87]: The network is based on difference
enhancement and spatial–spectral nonlocal. The
network is comprised of three distinct modules. These
modules are the difference enhancement module, the
spatial–spectral nonlocal module, and the asymmetric
double convolution with ghost module.
9) AMTNet [89]: An attention-based multiscale transformer
network using a CNN transformer structure. To model
contextual information, the network uses attention and
transformer models. The network also uses feature
sharing to bridge the domain gap.
10) USSFC
[88]:
An
efficient
ultralightweight
spatial–spectral feature cooperation network. The
network used multiscale decoupled convolution and
spatial–spectral feature cooperation strategies.
11) EATDer [39]: EATDer named edge-assisted adaptive
transformer detector. It is a Siamese network with an
edge-aware decoder. In each Siamese branch, it has
three self-adapting vision transformer blocks. Full-range
fusion modules connect two branches.
On each dataset, this article uses official code to reproduce
as much as possible. In order to make the analysis more
comprehensive, this article evaluates the performance of
SFEARNet in SegFormer encoder, MixTransformer-b0.
D. Implementation Details
The proposed SFEARNet and all baseline models are
implemented using PyTorch in this article. Training is
performed on an NVIDIA GeForce ray tracing texel extreme
(RTX) 3090 graphics processing unit (GPU). The input size
was set to 256 × 256 pixels. The batch size was 8. The
initial learning rate was set to 1e−4 . The ReduceLROnPlateau
strategy was employed to adjust the learning rate, having a
factor of 0.5 and patience of 6 epochs. Model parameters
(Params) were optimized using the AdamW optimizer with
a weight decay of 1e−3 . Various methods were applied to
the input data during training, including random rotation,
horizontal flipping, vertical flipping, and bitemporal phase
exchange. All the methods are data augmentation operations.
The SFEARNet model was trained for 100 epochs. During the
testing phase, no data augmentation techniques were used, and
only test data were utilized for evaluation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

5402518

Fig. 5. Visualization comparisons on the LEVIR-CD dataset. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) FC-EF. (d) FC-Siam-Conc. (e) FC-Siam-Diff. (f) STANet.
(g) BIT. (h) MSCANet. (i) DESSN. (j) ChangeFormer. (k) AMTNet. (l) USSFC. (m) EATDer. (n) SFEARNet. (o) Ground truth. White indicates true positive.
Black indicates true negative. Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.

E. Experimental Results
The accuracy of LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and
CLCD is compared with advanced methods. It can assess
the effectiveness of the proposed SFEARNet, as illustrated
in Tables I–IV. This article presents SFEARNet predictions
and existing methods visually. It can be seen in Figs. 5–8.
The diagrams offer a direct representation of the method’s
performance.
Compared to several existing methods, SFEARNet shows a
good performance on the LEVIR-CD dataset. This is shown
in Table I. In four key metrics, OA, F1, IOU, and Kappa,
SFEARNet achieves the highest scores. SFEARNet improves
IOU by 0.57, 1.87, 1.55, and 2.07 percentage points relative
to AMTNet, ChangeFormer, EATDer, and BIT. Meanwhile,
SFEARNet improves F1 by 0.93, 0.34, and 1.12 percentage
points compared to EATDer, AMTNet, and ChangeFormer.
In addition, a visual comparison between SFEARNet and other
methods is presented, as shown in Fig. 5. When dealing with
changing objects of different sizes, SFEARNet shows excellent
performance. SFEARNet is particularly sensitive to object
edges when detecting large changes and can accurately capture
boundary information. In addition, SFEARNet effectively
detects changes in dense roofs. Compared to other methods,
SFEARNet not only captures the general outline of small
buildings during change detection but also retains more
complete detailed information. The result is a more precise
delineation of the areas of change.
SFEARNet is compared with other methods on the WHUCD dataset. It can be seen in Table II. SFEARNet performs
best in the five main metrics. These are Rec, OA, F1, IOU,
and Kappa. Specifically, SFEARNet improves IOU by 0.72,
2.92, and 3.01 percentage points relative to AMTNet, BIT,
and MSCANet. Meanwhile, SFEARNet achieves 2.19, 7.27,
and 8.72 percentage points’ improvement in IOU compared to
BIT, USSFC, and EATDer. Meanwhile, SFEARNet achieves

TABLE I
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (%) FOR THE LEVIR-CD DATASET.
B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (%) FOR THE WHU-CD DATASET.
B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

0.42, 1.72, and 4.84 percentage points’ improvement in
F1 compared to AMTNet, BIT, and USSFC. A visual
comparison between SFEARNet and other methods on the
WHU-CD is shown in Fig. 6. SFEARNet achieves satisfactory
results in large change regions, irregular change regions, and
small to medium change regions. This result further validates
the superior performance of SFEARNet.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 6. Visualization comparisons on the WHU-CD dataset. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) FC-EF. (d) FC-Siam-Conc. (e) FC-Siam-Diff. (f) STANet.
(g) BIT. (h) MSCANet. (i) DESSN. (j) ChangeFormer. (k) AMTNet. (l) USSFC. (m) EATDer. (n) SFEARNet. (o) Ground truth. White indicates true positive.
Black indicates true negative. Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.
TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (%) FOR THE GZ-CD DATASET.
B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

TABLE IV
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (%) FOR THE CLCD DATASET.
B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

A quantitative presentation is provided for the SFEARNet
method and existing methods in the performance of GZ-CD.
The results can be found in Table III. The results demonstrate
that SFEARNet attains the highest scores on all six principal
indicators. Specifically, SFEARNet improves the IOU by
0.93, 7.56, and 9.17 percentage points compared to AMTNet,
EATDer, and STANet. Moreover, SFEARNet outperforms
AMTNet and EATDer by 0.57 and 4.79 percentage points,
respectively, in terms of F1. This article presents a comparative analysis of SFEARNet and alternative methods using the
GZ-CD dataset. This is illustrated in Fig. 7. In refining the
edges of large change areas, it can be seen that SFEARNet
shows remarkable performance. For regions with irregular
boundaries, SFEARNet also demonstrates higher recognition
accuracy. Although there are some missed detections in
medium- and small-scale change areas, SFEARNet can still
accurately identify the change regions and retain more detailed
information.

This article compares the performance of SFEARNet on
the CLCD dataset in both qualitative and quantitative terms.
It can be seen in Table IV and Fig. 8. Of the quantified
findings, SFEARNet scored highest on five measures: OA,
Rec, F1, IOU, and Kappa. In the IOU metrics, SFEARNet
has improved by 1.85 percentage points relative to AMTNet
and 3.72 percentage points relative to BIT. SFEARNet at
F1 improved by 1.40 percentage points over AMTNet,
2.84 percentage points over BIT, and 4.01 percentage points
over MSCANet. The qualitative results show that SFEARNet
achieves good recognition results in linear, small, large, and
irregular regions. Although there are some missed detections,
SFEARNet can still identify areas of change while retaining
edge information.
SFEARNet works best on the datasets of LEVIR-CD,
WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and CLCD. The results are evidence of
the effectiveness and robustness of this approach. SFEARNet
shows lower detection error and more accurate edge detection,
both quantitatively and qualitatively. It clearly demonstrates

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

5402518

Fig. 7. Visualization comparisons on the GZ-CD dataset. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) FC-EF. (d) FC-Siam-Conc. (e) FC-Siam-Diff. (f) STANet. (g) BIT.
(h) MSCANet. (i) DESSN. (j) ChangeFormer. (k) AMTNet. (l) USSFC. (m) EATDer. (n) SFEARNet. (o) Ground truth. White indicates true positive. Black
indicates true negative. Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.

Fig. 8. Visualization comparisons on the CLCD dataset. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) FC-EF. (d) FC-Siam-Conc. (e) FC-Siam-Diff. (f) STANet. (g) BIT.
(h) MSCANet. (i) DESSN. (j) ChangeFormer. (k) AMTNet. (l) USSFC. (m) EATDer. (n) SFEARNet. (o) Ground truth. White indicates true positive. Black
indicates true negative. Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.

SFEARNet’s superior performance in bitemporal change
detection.
V. D ISCUSSION
This section will be a discussion of the effectiveness of
SFITM, PFEM, EARM, and loss. The limitations of the
proposed method will be explored.
A. Effectiveness of SFITM
SFITM improves network performance by enhancing the
original upsampling method. This experiment is based on

the SegFormer network, utilizing MixTransformer-b0 as the
backbone network to construct a baseline network for
comparison. Method-1 integrates SFITM into the baseline
network. Method-1 is designed to evaluate the influence of
SFITM. A comprehensive evaluation of the performance of
SFITM was conducted through the utilization of four distinct
datasets. This includes LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and
CLCD.
The outcomes of the quantitative experiments conducted on
the four datasets are presented in Table V. The results show
that SFITM led to significant improvements in a number of
metrics. On the LEVIR-CD, Pre increased by 0.57 percentage

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE V
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS (%) OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF SFITM. B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

points, while IOU increased by 1.46 percentage points. The
WHU-CD showed an increase of 1.13 percentage points
in the IOU and 1.06 percentage points in the Pre. In the
GZ-CD, IOU increased by 1.37 percentage points and Rec
by 2.55 percentage points. The CLCD dataset demonstrated a
3.48 percentage point increase in Rec and a 3.46 percentage
point increase in IOU. The effectiveness of SFITM is
demonstrated by the quantitative results presented above.
As illustrated in Fig. 9, Method-1 demonstrated a substantial
enhancement in comparison to the baseline. The incorporation
of the SFITM enables the model to discern alterations
in the images with greater precision. This observation is
in accordance with the quantitative results, thereby further
substantiating the benefits of SFITM in enhancing network
performance.
In terms of F1, IOU, Kappa, and recall, SFITM has shown
significant advantages. The comparative analysis of LEVIRCD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and CLCD confirms this. The efficacy
of SFITM in optimizing network performance is confirmed by
the results.
B. Effectiveness of PFEM and EARM
PFEM improves features by combining different characteristics. EARM focuses on extracting and refining modified edge
information.
It is essential to note that the edge information utilized by
EARM is derived from the feature values generated by PFEM.
The corrected edge information will affect the feature values
generated by PFEM, thereby effectively combining the two
modules. Therefore, this article evaluates the effectiveness of
PFEM and EARM together. Four different datasets (LEVIRCD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and CLCD) were used for the
experiments. These experiments will comprehensively evaluate
the performance of PFEM and EARM. PFEM was added
to Method-1 to construct the new Method-2. SFEARNet
comprehensively applies SFITM, PFEM, and EARM.
The experimental findings indicate that the model’s
performance has been enhanced with PFEM and EARM.
It is illustrated in Table VI. The introduction of PFEM
increased the IOU by 0.53 percentage points and the F1 by
0.32 percentage points on LEVIR-CD. The introduction of
EARM resulted in an increase of 0.82 percentage points in
IOU and 0.49 percentage points in F1, respectively. The
application of PFEM to the WHU-CD dataset was observed to
result in an increase in IOU by 0.37 percentage points and in

Fig. 9. Visualization comparisons of the effectiveness of SFITM. (a) T1
image. (b) T2 image. (c) Baseline. (d) Method-1. (e) Ground truth. White
indicates true positive. Black indicates true negative. Red indicates false
positive. Green indicates false negative.

Rec by 2.44 percentage points. The introduction of EARM led
to a further increase in IOU and Pre by 0.42 percentage points
and 1.40 percentage points, respectively, thereby confirming
the efficacy of EARM. In the GZ-CD dataset, while PFEM
exhibited a 0.90 percentage point improvement in IOU,
Pre demonstrated a 2.76 percentage point increase. The
introduction of EARM has been shown to increase Rec by
1.02 percentage points and IOU by 0.83 percentage points.
The following results were obtained from the CLCD dataset.
The outcomes lead to a 0.47 percentage point enhancement
in F1 and a 0.62 percentage point growth in IOU with the
integration of the PFEM module. The incorporation of EARM

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

5402518

TABLE VI
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS (%) OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF PFEM AND EARM. B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

In conclusion, this article presents a comprehensive
demonstration of the benefits of PFEM and EARM in
enhancing performance. It can be evidenced by both qualitative
and quantitative evaluations. The introduction of these two
modules not only improves the model’s Pre, IOU, and Kappa
but also enhances its robustness and generalization ability
when dealing with complex scenes.

C. Effectiveness of Loss Function

Fig. 10. Visualization comparisons of the effectiveness of PFEM and EARM.
(a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Method-1. (d) Method-2. (e) SFEARNet.
(f) Ground truth. White indicates true positive. Black indicates true negative.
Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.

resulted in an enhancement in IOU by 1.83 percentage points
and Pre by 2.63 percentage points. This evidence serves to
illustrate the beneficial impact of PFEM and EARM on the
enhancement of change detection performance.
To intuitively demonstrate the experimental results, qualitative analysis was also conducted on each dataset. As shown
in Fig. 10, compared to Method-1, our method with PFEM
and EARM can more accurately identify changed regions,
especially in the edge areas. This result is consistent with the
quantitative analysis. PFEM and EARM are also shown to be
effective at improving change detection accuracy.

CE loss, Jaccard loss, and dice loss are all commonly
utilized loss functions in the field of deep learning. By using
the three loss functions together, the performance of the model
can be improved.
This article sets up ablation experiments to verify the
effectiveness of each loss function. Method-3 is the network
model using only CE loss. Method-4 is the network model
using both CE loss and Jaccard loss. SFEARNet uses all three
loss functions simultaneously.
The efficacy of the loss function can be demonstrated in
Table VII. It is clear that adding Jaccard loss results in
better accuracy for all the datasets. There was an increase of
0.54 percentage points in the IOU for the LEVIR-CD dataset
and an increase of 0.34 percentage points in the Rec dataset.
On the WHU-CD dataset, the IOU and pre metrics showed
an improvement of 0.42 and 0.72 percentage points. The GZCD dataset shows an IOU increase of 2.18 percentage points
and a pre increase of 2.11 percentage points. On the CLCD
dataset, IOU and Kappa increased by 2.07 and 1.71 percentage
points. Dice-loss similarly improves model performance. For
the LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD, and CLCD datasets, the
IOU increases by 0.54, 0.59, 1.63, and 0.19 percentage points.
F1 increases by 0.57, 0.34, 1.00, and 0.14 percentage points.
To provide a more visual demonstration of each loss function,
the results of each dataset are presented visually in Fig. 11.
Method-4 and SFEARNet are better than Method-3. This
finding serves to substantiate the efficacy of the individual
loss functions.
This article demonstrates the advantages of composite loss
function. The Rec, F1, IOU, and Kappa of the model have
been shown to be improved by the composite loss function.
Moreover, the model’s stability and robustness are enhanced.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE VII
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS (%) OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF L OSS F UNCTION . B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

datasets although it has a moderate level of Params. This
indicates that SFEARNet has a low level of spatial complexity
while achieving excellent performance in change detection.
SFEARNet shows a reduction in the number of Params while
achieving a reduction in the number of FLOPs compared to
DESSN and ANTNet. These findings indicate that SFEARNet
not only reduces storage space demands but also enhances
computational efficiency, which is of significant importance in
constrained computing environments. This evidence indicates
that SFEARNet is able to maintain high accuracy while
achieving the lowest time complexity. This makes it an ideal
choice for applications requiring fast response times.
In summary, there are significant efficiency and performance
advantages to the proposed SFEARNet network. SFEARNet
outperforms other methodologies on all datasets and, thus,
demonstrates its broad applicability and robustness in diverse
scenarios. In addition, SFEARNet demonstrates excellent
performance and the lowest FLOPs among models with
comparable parameter counts. This further substantiates the
equilibrium of SFEARNet in regard to model complexity,
precision, and computational efficacy.
E. Limitations of SFEARNet

Fig. 11. Visualization comparisons of the effectiveness of loss function.
(a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Method-3. (d) Method-4. (e) SFEARNet.
(f) Ground truth. White indicates true positive. Black indicates true negative.
Red indicates false positive. Green indicates false negative.

D. Efficiency Comparison
The number of Params and floating-point operations per
second (FLOPs) are used to evaluate the performance of
SFEARNet. This evaluation validates SFRAENet’s effectiveness and efficiency. The complexity of the model is indicated
by the number of Params. In contrast, the concept of FLOPs is
a parameter for evaluating the time complexity of the model.
The Params and the FLOPs of the proposed SFEARNet
are presented in comparison with other methods. It is given
in Table VIII. The comparison unambiguously illustrates the
benefits of SFEARNet in relation to Params and FLOPs.
SFEARNet has the highest F1 and IOU across the different

The aforementioned method, SFEARNet, has demonstrated
an acceptable equilibrium between efficiency and accuracy in
change detection tasks. However, it must be acknowledged
that certain inherent constraints do exist, which require further
attention in subsequent research. The involvement of complex
matrix operations and the intricate network architecture results
in a relatively high parameter size for SFEARNet. The high
parameter size necessitates a greater demand for computational
resources and storage, which may impede the deployment
of SFEARNet in resource-constrained environments. Despite
SFEARNet’s remarkable impact on edge extraction for
changing areas and its ability to capture more accurate and
refined edge features, its performance is still limited by
the complexity of the network and the variety of feature
types. This constraint suggests that SFEARNet might continue
to encounter instances of either missed or false detection
in particular contexts. The existence of these phenomena
indicates that there is still scope for further optimization
of the proposed method. Future research may benefit from

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

5402518

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF E FFICIENCY OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS . B OLD VALUES A RE B EST

investigating techniques that could improve the performance
of the aforementioned network, such as model pruning,
quantization, or knowledge distillation. These methods can
reduce the parameter size and computational requirements
while maintaining or even improving accuracy. Furthermore,
an investigation into more sophisticated network architectures
or feature fusion methodologies could assist SFEARNet in
more effectively processing intricate feature types, thereby
reducing the occurrence of missed and false detections.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article presents a network combining semantic flow
and edge-aware refinement for highly efficient RS image
change detection named SFEARNet. The network has been
constructed based on the SegFormer architecture and integrates
three key modules. These are the PFEM, the SFITM, and
the EARM. PFEM strengthens the differential information of
change areas. SFITM is designed to minimize information
loss during the upsampling. EARM is designed to refine the
edge of the changed regions. It makes edges more precise
and refined. The collective impact of these modules has a
discernible positive influence. They also excel in the precision
and comprehensiveness of altered region delineation.
This article uses a combination of multiscale features.
PFEM combines different scale images at different dilatation
rates. The module combines the original differential,
contextual, and attention features. In SFITM, the transfer of
semantic information between deep and shallow features is
employed to obtain high-resolution feature maps with high
semantic information content. The extensive use of multiscale
features enhances the network’s ability to capture rich detail
and high-level semantics in the image. It also improves its
stability and adaptability in the face of inputs of different
scales and complexities.
In this article, fine edge feature generation and correction
are applied to obtain more accurate and detailed edge
information in EARM using the dice loss function. This
edge information is further used to make a refinement to
the extracted features. The edge region of the feature map is
adjusted and optimized in order to make the final obtained
feature values more explicit and clearer at the edge. The
inclusion of EARM makes the network show a high degree of
accuracy and robustness.

To assess the efficacy of SFEARNet, comparative experiments were conducted on the LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, GZ-CD,
and CLCD datasets. The findings of the experiments were
categorized according to three distinct analytical approaches:
qualitative, quantitative, and network efficiency analyses.
These allow for the verification of the robustness and
generalizability of SFEARNet. The results further substantiate
the effect of SFITM, PFEM, and EARM in enhancing
model performance. This article also illustrates the efficacy
of mixed losses. SFEARNet achieves an optimal balance
between efficiency and accuracy. In particular, in networks
with the same parameter scale, SFEARNet demonstrated the
lowest FLOPs and achieved the highest efficiency. SFEARNet
exhibited slightly superior accuracy and demonstrated a
notable enhancement in efficiency.
Although SFEARNet has reached a certain equilibrium
between efficiency and accuracy, further enhancements are
still necessary with regard to parameter size. Moreover,
in scenarios characterized by complexity, the process of
change detection can be significantly influenced by a number
of external factors, including lighting and shadows. In future
research, the objective will be to enhance the model’s
resilience to interference, reduce the model’s parameter size,
and accelerate the model’s inference speed. Furthermore,
additional research will be undertaken to investigate the
viability of cross-device change detection solutions in
environments with limited resources.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Lv et al., “Land cover change detection with heterogeneous
remote sensing images: Review, progress, and perspective,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 110, no. 12, pp. 1976–1991, Dec. 2022.
[2] Y. Du, R. Zhong, Q. Li, and F. Zhang, “TransUNet++SAR: Change
detection with deep learning about architectural ensemble in SAR
images,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 6, Dec. 2022.
[3] Z. Zhu and C. E. Woodcock, “Continuous change detection and
classification of land cover using all available Landsat data,” Remote
Sens. Environ., vol. 144, pp. 152–171, Mar. 2014.
[4] K. Tan et al., “Change detection on multi-sensor imagery using mixed
interleaved group convolutional network,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 133, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 108446.
[5] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhong, J. Wang, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Building
damage assessment for rapid disaster response with a deep objectbased semantic change detection framework: From natural disasters
to man-made disasters,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 265, Nov. 2021,
Art. no. 112636.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[6] Y. Qing et al., “Operational earthquake-induced building damage
assessment using CNN-based direct remote sensing change detection
on superpixel level,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 112,
Aug. 2022, Art. no. 102899.
[7] S. Sony, K. Dunphy, A. Sadhu, and M. Capretz, “A systematic review
of convolutional neural network-based structural condition assessment
techniques,” Eng. Struct., vol. 226, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 111347.
[8] Y. Liu et al., “Landslide detection of high-resolution satellite images
using asymmetric dual-channel network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci.
Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), Jul. 2021, pp. 4091–4094.
[9] S. Amini, M. Saber, H. Rabiei-Dastjerdi, and S. Homayouni, “Urban
land use and land cover change analysis using random forest
classification of Landsat time series,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 11,
p. 2654, Jun. 2022.
[10] W. Zhou, D. Ming, X. Lv, K. Zhou, H. Bao, and Z. Hong, “SO–CNN
based urban functional zone fine division with VHR remote sensing
image,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 236, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 111458.
[11] C. Zhang et al., “A hybrid MLP-CNN classifier for very fine resolution
remotely sensed image classification,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote
Sens., vol. 140, pp. 133–144, Jun. 2018.
[12] D. Dong et al., “Building extraction from high spatial resolution remote
sensing images of complex scenes by combining region-line feature
fusion and OCNN,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 16, pp. 4423–4438, 2023.
[13] J. Zheng, Y. Feng, C. Bai, and J. Zhang, “Hyperspectral image
classification using mixed convolutions and covariance pooling,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 522–534, Jan. 2021.
[14] S. Wan, C. Gong, P. Zhong, B. Du, L. Zhang, and J. Yang,
“Multiscale dynamic graph convolutional network for hyperspectral
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 3162–3177, May 2020.
[15] X. Wang, K. Tan, P. Du, C. Pan, and J. Ding, “A unified multiscale
learning framework for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4508319.
[16] D. Dong, D. Ming, L. Xu, Q. Qiao, and Y. Zhang, “A stepwise
framework for fine-scale mining area types recognition in large-scale
scenes by GF-5 and GF-2 images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 5714–5727, 2023.
[17] Y. Quan, H. Xu, R. Wang, Q. Guan, and J. Zheng, “ORSI salient
object detection via progressive semantic flow and uncertainty-aware
refinement,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5608013.
[18] D. Yu and S. Ji, “A new spatial-oriented object detection framework
for remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4407416.
[19] L. Xu, J. Yu, and D. Ming, “HODet: A new detector for arbitraryoriented rectangular object in optical remote sensing imagery,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17,
pp. 2918–2926, 2024.
[20] M. Wang, X. Li, K. Tan, J. Mango, C. Pan, and D. Zhang, “Positionaware graph-CNN fusion network: An integrated approach combining
geospatial information and graph attention network for multiclass
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 4402016.
[21] Q. Li, Y. Chen, and Y. Zeng, “Transformer with transfer CNN for
remote-sensing-image object detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 4,
p. 984, Feb. 2022.
[22] L. Xu et al., “Parcel level staple crop type identification based on newly
defined red-edge vegetation indices and ORNN,” Comput. Electron.
Agricult., vol. 211, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 108012.
[23] Q. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of contextual anomaly in remotely
sensed data,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 202, pp. 75–87, Dec. 2017.
[24] H. Wang et al., “FPT: Fine-grained detection of driver distraction
based on the feature pyramid vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1594–1608, Feb. 2023.
[25] Z. Deng, H. Sun, S. Zhou, J. Zhao, L. Lei, and H. Zou, “Multi-scale
object detection in remote sensing imagery with convolutional neural
networks,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 145, pp. 3–22,
Nov. 2018.
[26] J. Han, D. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, and J. Ren, “Object detection in
optical remote sensing images based on weakly supervised learning and
high-level feature learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53,
no. 6, pp. 3325–3337, Jun. 2015.

[27] H. Wan et al., “Orientation detector for ship targets in SAR images based
on semantic flow feature alignment and Gaussian label matching,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5218616.
[28] Y. Gu, H. Xu, Y. Quan, W. Chen, and J. Zheng, “ORSI salient object
detection via bidimensional attention and full-stage semantic guidance,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5603213.
[29] W. Du et al., “SARNas: A hardware-aware SAR target detection
algorithm via multiobjective neural architecture search,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5212923.
[30] J.-F. Hu, T.-Z. Huang, L.-J. Deng, T.-X. Jiang, G. Vivone, and
J. Chanussot, “Hyperspectral image super-resolution via deep spatiospectral attention convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 7251–7265, Dec. 2022.
[31] X. Hu, F. Xu, Y. Guo, W. Feng, and Y.-Q. Jin, “MDLI-Net: Model-driven
learning imaging network for high-resolution microwave imaging with
large rotating angle and sparse sampling,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5212617.
[32] X. Dong, X. Sun, X. Jia, Z. Xi, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Remote sensing
image super-resolution using novel dense-sampling networks,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 1618–1633, Feb. 2021.
[33] D. Zhang, J. Shao, X. Li, and H. T. Shen, “Remote sensing image superresolution via mixed high-order attention network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5183–5196, Jun. 2021.
[34] X. Peng, R. Zhong, Z. Li, and Q. Li, “Optical remote sensing image
change detection based on attention mechanism and image difference,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 7296–7307,
Sep. 2020.
[35] S. Fang, K. Li, J. Shao, and Z. Li, “SNUNet-CD: A densely connected
Siamese network for change detection of VHR images,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2021.
[36] X. Long, W. Zhuang, M. Xia, K. Hu, and H. Lin, “SASiamNet:
Self-adaptive Siamese network for change detection of remote sensing
image,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17,
pp. 1021–1034, 2024.
[37] B. Bai, W. Fu, T. Lu, and S. Li, “Edge-guided recurrent convolutional
neural network for multitemporal remote sensing image building change
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13,
2021.
[38] J. Zhang et al., “AERNet: An attention-guided edge refinement network
and a dataset for remote sensing building change detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5617116.
[39] J. Ma, J. Duan, X. Tang, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “EATDer: Edge-assisted
adaptive transformer detector for remote sensing change detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5602015.
[40] Y. Xiang, X. Tian, Y. Xu, X. Guan, and Z. Chen, “EGMT-CD: Edgeguided multimodal transformers change detection from satellite and
aerial images,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 86, Dec. 2023.
[41] X. Wang et al., “Double U-Net (W-Net): A change detection network
with two heads for remote sensing imagery,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ.
Geoinf., vol. 122, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103456.
[42] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
“SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with
transformers,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 34, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
J. W. Vaughan, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2021,
pp. 12077–12090.
[43] R. Ji, K. Tan, X. Wang, C. Pan, and L. Xin, “PASSNet: A spatial–
spectral feature extraction network with patch attention module for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[44] Y. Mo, Z. Guo, R. Zhong, W. Song, and S. Cao, “Urban functional
zone classification using light-detection-and-ranging point clouds, aerial
images, and point-of-interest data,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 2, p. 386,
Jan. 2024.
[45] L. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Zou, and H. Dong, “Unsupervised deep
representation learning and few-shot classification of PolSAR images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5100316.
[46] B. Zeng et al., “Top-down aircraft detection in large-scale scenes based
on multi-source data and FEF-R-CNN,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 43,
no. 3, pp. 1108–1130, Feb. 2022.
[47] H. Chen, W. Yang, L. Liu, and G.-S. Xia, “Coarse-to-fine semantic
segmentation of satellite images,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 217, pp. 1–17, Nov. 2024.
[48] M. Xu, X. Zhong, and R. Zhong, “A method for automatic extraction and
individual segmentation of urban street trees from laser point clouds,”
Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 180, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 111431.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: SFEARNet: A NETWORK COMBINING SEMANTIC FLOW AND EDGE-AWARE REFINEMENT

[49] R. Xu, C. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Xu, W. Meng, and X. Zhang, “RSSFormer:
Foreground saliency enhancement for remote sensing land-cover
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1052–1064,
2023.
[50] Y. Zhang, D. Ming, D. Dong, and L. Xu, “Object-oriented U-GCN
for open-pit mining extraction from high spatial resolution remotesensing images of complex scenes,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 45, no. 22,
pp. 8313–8333, Nov. 2024.
[51] T. Lu, D. Ming, X. Lin, Z. Hong, X. Bai, and J. Fang, “Detecting
building edges from high spatial resolution remote sensing imagery
using richer convolution features network,” Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 9,
p. 1496, Sep. 2018.
[52] G. Wang et al., “FSoD-Net: Full-scale object detection from optical
remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5602918.
[53] Z. Guo, J. Wei, H. Sun, R. Zhong, and C. Ji, “Enhanced water leakage
detection in shield tunnels based on laser scanning intensity images
using RDES-Net,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 17, pp. 5680–5690, 2024.
[54] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. Van den Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, pp. 1–38,
Apr. 2021.
[55] X. Xia et al., “GAN-based anomaly detection: A review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 493, pp. 497–535, Jul. 2022.
[56] Y. Xiao, Q. Yuan, K. Jiang, J. He, X. Jin, and L. Zhang, “EDiffSR:
An efficient diffusion probabilistic model for remote sensing image
super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5601514.
[57] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, “Image super-resolution using
deep convolutional networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 295–307, Feb. 2016.
[58] Y. Chen, D. Ming, and X. Lv, “Superpixel based land cover classification
of VHR satellite image combining multi-scale CNN and scale parameter
estimation,” Earth Sci. Informat., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 341–363, Sep. 2019.
[59] X. Tang, T. Zhang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao,
“WNet: W-shaped hierarchical network for remote-sensing image
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5615814.
[60] J. Huang, Y. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Zheng, J. Wang, and D. Ming, “Change
detection of high spatial resolution images based on region-line primitive
association analysis and evidence fusion,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 21,
p. 2484, Oct. 2019.
[61] S. Yuan, R. Zhong, Q. Li, and Y. Dong, “MFGFNet: A multi-scale
remote sensing change detection network using the global filter in the
frequency domain,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 6, p. 1682, Mar. 2023.
[62] D. Wang, X. Chen, M. Jiang, S. Du, B. Xu, and J. Wang,
“ADS-Net: An attention-based deeply supervised network for remote
sensing image change detection,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf.,
vol. 101, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102348.
[63] F. Gu, P. Xiao, X. Zhang, Z. Li, and D. Muhtar, “FDFF-Net: A full-scale
difference feature fusion network for change detection in high-resolution
remote sensing images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 17, pp. 2161–2172, 2024.
[64] X. Wang et al., “A high-resolution feature difference attention network
for the application of building change detection,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
Observ. Geoinf., vol. 112, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 102950.
[65] R. C. Daudt, B. Le Saux, and A. Boulch, “Fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection,” in Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2018, pp. 4063–4067.
[66] S. Zhu, Y. Song, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “ECFNet: A Siamese network
with fewer FPs and fewer FNs for change detection of remote-sensing
images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[67] M. Wang, K. Tan, X. Jia, X. Wang, and Y. Chen, “A deep Siamese
network with hybrid convolutional feature extraction module for change
detection based on multi-sensor remote sensing images,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 2, p. 205, Jan. 2020.
[68] X. Li, M. He, H. Li, and H. Shen, “A combined loss-based
multiscale fully convolutional network for high-resolution remote
sensing image change detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[69] H. Chen, Z. Qi, and Z. Shi, “Remote sensing image change detection
with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–14,
2021.
[70] Q. Li, R. Zhong, X. Du, and Y. Du, “TransUNetCD: A hybrid transformer network for change detection in optical remote-sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5622519.

5402518

[71] M. Zhang and W. Shi, “A feature difference convolutional neural
network-based change detection method,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 7232–7246, Oct. 2020.
[72] T. Du et al., “ESDSCNet: An enhanced shallow feature difference and
semantic context network for remote sensing change detection: With
building change detection as a case,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 3726–3752, Jun. 2023.
[73] L. Song, M. Xia, L. Weng, H. Lin, M. Qian, and B. Chen, “Axial cross
attention meets CNN: Bibranch fusion network for change detection,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16,
pp. 32–43, 2023.
[74] M. Liu, Z. Chai, H. Deng, and R. Liu, “A CNN-transformer network
with multiscale context aggregation for fine-grained cropland change
detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 15, pp. 4297–4306, 2022.
[75] W. Wang, X. Tan, P. Zhang, and X. Wang, “A CBAM based multiscale
transformer fusion approach for remote sensing image change detection,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 6817–6825, 2022.
[76] W. G. C. Bandara and V. M. Patel, “A transformer-based Siamese
network for change detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens.
Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 207–210.
[77] C. Zhang et al., “A deeply supervised image fusion network for change
detection in high resolution bi-temporal remote sensing images,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 166, pp. 183–200, Aug. 2020.
[78] L. Xia, J. Chen, J. Luo, J. Zhang, D. Yang, and Z. Shen, “Building
change detection based on an edge-guided convolutional neural network
combined with a transformer,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 18, p. 4524,
Sep. 2022.
[79] Y. Zhu, K. Lv, Y. Yu, and W. Xu, “Edge-guided parallel network for
VHR remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 7791–7803, 2023.
[80] X. Li et al., “Semantic flow for fast and accurate scene parsing,” CoRR,
vol. abs/2002.10120, 2020.
[81] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder–decoder with Atrous separable convolution for semantic
image segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 801–818.
[82] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[83] Y. Sun, S. Wang, C. Chen, and T.-Z. Xiang, “Boundary-guided
camouflaged object detection,” 2022, arXiv:2207.00794.
[84] H. Chen and Z. Shi, “A spatial–temporal attention-based method and a
new dataset for remote sensing image change detection,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1662, 2020.
[85] S. Ji, S. Wei, and M. Lu, “Fully convolutional networks for multisource
building extraction from an open aerial and satellite imagery data
set,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 574–586,
Jan. 2018.
[86] D. Peng, L. Bruzzone, Y. Zhang, H. Guan, H. Ding, and X. Huang,
“SemiCDNet: A semisupervised convolutional neural network for
change detection in high resolution remote-sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 5891–5906, Jul. 2021.
[87] T. Lei et al., “Difference enhancement and spatial–spectral nonlocal
network for change detection in VHR remote sensing images,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2021.
[88] T. Lei et al., “Ultralightweight spatial–spectral feature cooperation
network for change detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4402114.
[89] W. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Liu, Y. Yu, and J. Li, “An attention-based multiscale
transformer network for remote sensing image change detection,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 202, pp. 599–609, Aug. 2023.

Miao Li is currently pursuing the master’s degree
with the School of Information Engineering, China
University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing, China.
Her research interests include processing and
change detection of high spatial resolution remote
sensing images.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Dongping Ming (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.E. degree in land administration and cadastral
surveying from Wuhan Technical University of
Surveying and Mapping, Wuhan, China, in 1999, the
M.E. degree in cartography and geographic information engineering from Wuhan University, Wuhan,
in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in cartography and
geographic information system from the Institute
of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2006.
She is currently a Full Professor with the School of Information Engineering,
China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing. Her research interests
include high spatial resolution remote sensing image processing and analysis,
remote sensing application of resources and environment monitoring, and
intelligent prevention and control of geohazards.

Lu Xu received the B.S. degree in geographical
information science and the Ph.D. degree in
surveying and mapping from China University of
Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing, China, in 2018 and
2024, respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer with the School of
Information Engineering, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He focuses on comprehending
very high spatial resolution remote sensing images.
His research interests include object-based image
analysis (OBIA) and information extraction by deep
learning methods.

Dehui Dong is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in surveying and mapping with the School
of Information Engineering, China University of
Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing, China.
His research interests include deep learning for
high spatial resolution remote sensing images’
processing and applications.

Yu Zhang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Information Engineering, China
University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing, China.
Her research interests include the intelligent
processing and application of high spatial resolution
remote sensing images.

Authorized licensed use limited to: JILIN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on February 24,2026 at 14:27:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.



============================================================
PROJECT NOTES (Maintained by assistant)
Last updated: 2026-05-07
============================================================

[Recovery Summary]
This section restores discussion results after an interrupted session.

1) Baseline vs New Contribution
- Baseline (existing framework): semantic-flow and edge-aware change detection pipeline.
- New contribution (current project): feature-level contrastive supervision and bounded multi-task joint optimization objective.

2) Code-Verified Objective Form
- Segmentation branch:
  loss_seg = alpha * CE_norm + (1 - alpha) * IoU_norm
- Total objective:
  loss_all = (1 - beta - gamma) * loss_seg + beta * loss_contrast + gamma * loss_edge
- Normalization rule:
  CE is mapped to [0,1] by 1-exp(-CE), IoU/contrast/edge terms are clamped to [0,1], and final loss is clamped to [0,1].

3) Pseudo-change-oriented Interpretation
- Target behavior is annotation-consistent change prediction under pseudo-change disturbance (visual difference exists but label says unchanged),
  not merely maximizing raw photometric-change sensitivity.

4) Writing Constraints to Keep Consistent
- In innovation summary language, avoid presenting baseline model name itself as the innovation.
- Use wording: "multi-task joint optimization".
- In Method section, provide explicit equations and symbol definitions for alpha, beta, gamma, margin.

5) Next Execution Queue
- Finalize methodology subsection text with objective equations.
- Plan ablation factors: beta, gamma, margin.
- Link reproducibility artifacts (logs/csv/best_model path) in experiment section.

6) Progress on 2026-05-07
- Chapter 3 (Methodology) has been fully drafted and written into:
  manuscript/Sections/4-Methodology.tex
- Main covered parts:
  (i) pseudo-change motivation,
  (ii) framework overview,
  (iii) feature-level contrastive supervision,
  (iv) bounded multi-task joint optimization,
  (v) linkage to five-part experiment protocol.
